# ProjectEuler0012
My work on 

problem #12 of projecteuler.net:

Highly Divisible Triangular Number

The sequence of triangle numbers is generated by adding the natural numbers. 
So the $7$<sup>th</sup> triangle number would be $1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6 + 7 = 28$.
The first ten terms would be:
$$1, 3, 6, 10, 15, 21, 28, 36, 45, 55, \dots$$
Let us list the factors of the first seven triangle numbers:
$$\begin{align}
\mathbf 1 &amp;\colon 1\\
\mathbf 3 &amp;\colon 1,3\\
\mathbf 6 &amp;\colon 1,2,3,6\\
\mathbf{10} &amp;\colon 1,2,5,10\\
\mathbf{15} &amp;\colon 1,3,5,15\\
\mathbf{21} &amp;\colon 1,3,7,21\\
\mathbf{28} &amp;\colon 1,2,4,7,14,28
\end{align}$$
We can see that $28$ is the first triangle number to have over five divisors.
What is the value of the first triangle number to have over five hundred divisors?

Completed on Mon, 22 Feb 2021, 19:28

#######################################################################################
Please note: Project Euler's policy allows publication of solutions for the first 100 problems,
that's why I am sharing my work here for reference and educational purposes.
#######################################################################################

A couple of useful facts.
1. Triangular numbers are generated by $n(n+1)/2$, $n \in \mathbb{N}$. 
And $n$ and $n+1$ are always coprime (easy to understand why thinking of the sieve of Eratosthenes).
2. The number of divisors $d(n)$ of an integer $n$ with known prime factorization is given by:

$$n = p_1^{m_1} \times p_2^{m_2} \times \ldots \times p_s^{m_s}$$,

$$ d(n) = (m_1 + 1)(m_2+1)\ldots(m_s+1)$$.

As a consequence, the number of divisors of the product of two coprimes is just the product
of their respective number of divisors. In case of a triangular number, depending if $n$ is
even or odd, we only need to determine either the number of divisors of $n/2$ and $n+1$,
or $n$ and $(n+1)/2$, and then multiply them.

This simplifies the matter enormously. For example, for a triangual number $500,000,500,000 \simeq 5\cdot 10^{11}$
we only need to factorize $500,000$ and $1,000,001$, and for each of those primes are needed only up to $\sqrt{n} \simeq 1000$.

I have already developed all the necessary factorization machinery in previous problems (5, 7, 9, 10), so with a few minimal
tweaks it can be used to count the divisors. Then just by cycling through integers we find the solution with minimum conputations,
with $n$ only slightly higher than $10000$, but $T$ of order $100,000,000$. Checking it directly would have required much more
computational effort. 


 


